♪ ♪
>> NAWAL Al-MAGHAFI: I'm in
Kadhimiya, Central Baghdad--
one of Shia Islam's most
important pilgrimage sites.
Millions visit this holy shrine,
and many couples come here
to get married.
Just walking around
the shopping arcade
across from the main shrine,
I've come across multiple
marriage offices.
We've come here because of
increasing concerns
among Iraqi Shias that some
clerics are abusing
an ancient marriage practice
to exploit women and girls.
It's called "muta'ah" or
"munqata"--
pleasure or temporary marriage--
and it allows a man
to pay for a short-term wife.
I have to be discreet
filming this,
but we're here to investigate
allegations
that some of the clerics here
are grooming women,
and even acting like pimps.
♪ ♪
There are no reliable statistics
about how often this custom
is actually used today.
It's illegal under Iraqi law.
But some clerics say there are
occasions
when it is appropriate.
This is cleric Faris al-Mousawi.
He runs a marriage office
in Sadr City,
another Shia area of Baghdad.
What are the rules behind
muta'ah marriage?
>> AL-MOUSAWI:
>> MAGHAFI: He says he doesn't
conduct
muta'ah marriages himself,
because they're illegal.
But he tells me that sometimes
they are permitted
under religious sharia law,
and they enable a man to help
a woman in need.
>> MAGHAFI: But what's
the difference between
muta'ah marriage and
prostitution?
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: 15 years of war have
had a devastating effect
on Iraq's women and girls.
♪ ♪
It's been estimated that there
are more than a million widows
in Iraq, and more than 800,000
children who've lost parents.
♪ ♪
This 16-year-old girl asked
to be called Rusul.
For her safety, an actor is
voicing her words.
>> RUSUL (dramatized):
>> MAGHAFI: She says her father
died when she was 12,
and her family was left
destitute.
By the time she was 13, she was
already married and divorced.
Then a man offered her
a pleasure marriage.
>> RUSUL (dramatized):
>> MAGHAFI: Rusul says a cleric
from Kadhimiya
did the ceremony, and that she
didn't understand
what she was getting into.
After two months,
the man left her.
>> RUSUL (dramatized):
(sighs)
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: Over more than a
year of reporting,
our team spoke to around
25 women and girls
who said pleasure marriages had
been used to exploit them.
All feared reprisals
if they showed their faces.
Iraqi lawyers, journalists, and
human-rights workers told us
that abuse of the practice
was a significant
and growing problem,
but warned us it would be
difficult to expose.
(rustling)
To find out how widespread
it is,
we had one of our colleagues go
undercover in Kadhimiya.
(car horn honks)
If discovered,
he risked being detained
by one of Iraq's feared
Shia militias.
We're concealing his identity.
>> When I arrived,
I was really scared.
First checkpoint
was really scary,
because I had a secret camera.
If they found this,
no way I can run away.
>> MAGHAFI: While many clerics
go through years
of religious education, it's
possible in Iraq
to become a cleric
and open a marriage office
with very little
formal training.
Posing as a potential client,
our reporter met
with ten clerics here,
telling them he wanted
a pleasure marriage
with a 13-year-old.
Eight of those clerics agreed to
conduct such a marriage
if he had the parents' consent.
One of them was Sayyid Raad.
>> Salaam alaikum.
(Raad speaking Arabic)
>> MAGHAFI: Our reporter met
him outside the main shrine
and went with him
to his nearby office.
He saw his license
to conduct marriages
issued by the Iraqi Ministry
of Justice.
Raad said he had two offices
in Kadhimiya
and employed four other clerics.
His title, "Sayyid," means he
claims descent
from the prophet Muhammad.
>> RAAD AND REPORTER:
>> MAGHAFI: He agreed to do
a pleasure marriage
if our reporter brought
a girl to him.
♪ ♪
>> REPORTER:
>> MAGHAFI: Our undercover
reporter met him again
in an upscale mall.
He told him he'd now found
a 13-year-old girl
and had her family's permission.
>> RAAD:
>> REPORTER:
>> MAGHAFI: Sayyid Raad was
willing to proceed
without even speaking
to the girl's family.
>> REPORTER:
>> RAAD:
>> REPORTER AND RAAD:
>> MAGHAFI: Sayyid Raad said
a man could do
as many pleasure marriages
as he wanted.
>> RAAD:
(muezzin calling adhan)
>> MAGHAFI: Our team spoke
to two dozen men
who said they did brief
temporary marriages
to get sex.
They told us the practice
is widespread.
One of them agreed to give an
interview
if we didn't show his face.
>> MAN:
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: The man said he
regularly does muta'ah marriages
with women in their 20s,
but he's heard that some men
want younger girls.
>> MAN:
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: Our reporter
had told Sayyid Raad
that the girl he wanted
a muta'ah marriage with
was 13 years old and a virgin.
>> REPORTER:
>> RAAD AND REPORTER:
>> RAAD:
>> MAGHAFI: What Raad said next
was alarming.
>> RAAD:
>> REPORTER:
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: We went to the Iraqi
Ministry of Shia Affairs
to ask about what we'd found.
They said they had no oversight
over marriage offices
in Kadhimiya and declined
to give an interview.
The Ministry of Justice,
which issues licenses
to conduct marriages,
also refused to talk to us.
We approached more than
20 senior Shia clerics.
Some condemned the abuse
we found,
but none would go on camera
to discuss it.
One former high-ranking cleric
agreed to talk to us--
Ghaith Tamimi.
>> TAMIMI:
>> MAGHAFI: He's become
an outspoken critic
of the religious leadership
in Iraq.
After receiving death threats,
he's now living in exile
in London.
He says that most Shia Muslims
would be horrified
at muta'ah marriage being used
to enable men
to marry children.
>> TAMIMI:
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: We'd been told that
abusive muta'ah marriages
were happening near the holiest
site in Shia Islam.
This is Karbala, it's the
biggest Shia pilgrimage site
in the world.
Tens of millions of pilgrims
come here every year.
♪ ♪
I spoke to Sheikh Emad Alassady,
the head of the shrine's
marriage office.
So we've heard about pleasure
marriages, muta'ah marriages.
Do you do them here?
>> ALASSADY:
>> MAGHAFI: But he said they do
still happen in secret--
and are allowable
under sharia law.
Don't you think these pleasure
marriages
exploit vulnerable girls?
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: In the streets
around the shrine,
our reporter asked four clerics
if they would conduct
a pleasure marriage.
Two said they would.
One of them was Sheikh Salawi.
>> REPORTER AND SALAWI:
>> MAGHAFI: Sheikh Salawi said
he had completed
extensive religious studies,
and also said that
he was a member
of one of Iraq's powerful
and well-armed Shia militias.
Our reporter told him he'd met
a young girl
who was still a virgin.
>> REPORTER:
>> SALAWI:
>> REPORTER AND SALAWI:
>> REPORTER:
>> SALAWI:
>> MAGHAFI: We showed this
footage to Yanar Mohammed.
She runs a network of shelters
across Iraq
that help victims of sexual
abuse and muta'ah marriage.
>> Nine years old?
They are just opening a shop
for pedophiles,
inviting them from all over
the world.
The cleric is trying to make it
sound as legal
and religiously accepted,
but in the community,
they look at it as prostitution.
It's not acceptable.
In our shelter, we see women
over and over again
who were the victims
of these abusers.
>> MAGHAFI: We showed her
footage of Sayyid Raad.
Our reporter had asked him what
would happen
if he took a girl's virginity
during a pleasure marriage.
>> REPORTER:
>> RAAD:
>> RAAD AND REPORTER:
>> They are speaking of
how a man can get away
with his crime of raping
a young girl.
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: I met a young woman
who asked to be called Mona.
She says she lost her virginity
in a pleasure marriage.
For her safety, an actor
is speaking her words.
>> MONA (dramatized):
>> MAGHAFI: She says
the man took her
to a cleric in Kadhimiya
for a pleasure marriage.
She was only 14.
Her parents knew nothing
about it.
>> MONA (dramatized):
>> MAGHAFI: So the Sheikh knew
you were a virgin.
>> MAGHAFI: Mona had been
groomed by a sexual predator
with the help of a cleric.
But now she's most afraid
of her own family.
>> MONA (dramatized):
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: Sayyid Raad had
agreed to conduct
a pleasure marriage
with a 13-year-old.
But would he actually
go through with it?
The cleric now offered to do
the ceremony in a taxi--
over the phone--
for around $200.
He didn't ask to meet
the girl in person
or talk to her family.
>> Basically, another colleague
of mine, she was in the hotel.
And when he ring the phone,
my female colleague,
she was on another end
of the phone,
and she was ready to answer.
>> RAAD:
>> I'm not thinking this
marriage will be that simple.
The only question he ask of her,
"What's your name? "
And he start make the ceremony
without any question.
>> RAAD:
>> REPORTER 2 (on phone):
>> RAAD AND REPORTER 2:
>> RAAD:
>> REPORTER 2:
(reporter 1 replies in Arabic)
>> RAAD:
(talking in Arabic)
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI:
Rusul says that since
her first pleasure marriage,
she's been forced to work for
the cleric who conducted it.
She wouldn't tell us his name,
only that his office is in
Kadhimiya.
>> RUSUL (dramatized):
>> MAGHAFI: She says she's been
made to do more than a dozen
temporary marriages.
>> MAGHAFI:
>> RUSUL (dramatized):
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: We were now hearing
from multiple sources
that some clerics were using
pleasure marriages
to pimp women and girls.
We wanted to find out if the
clerics we had secretly filmed
were doing this.
Our reporter rang Sheikh Salawi.
>> SALAWI (on phone):
>> REPORTER:
>> SALAWI:
>> SALAWI AND REPORTER:
>> REPORTER:
>> MAGHAFI: He told our reporter
he could offer him
a choice of women in their 20s
and 30s.
>> SALAWI:
♪ ♪
>> MAGHAFI: Back in Kadhimiya,
we put the same question
to Sayyid Raad.
Would he provide a woman?
>> REPORTER:
>> RAAD:
>> MAGHAFI: We wanted to put
our allegations
to the clerics we'd filmed.
But it was too dangerous to do
it in person.
I phoned Sayyid Raad
from London.
(phone ringing)
>> (on phone): Hello.
>> MAGHAFI: Hello, salaam
alaikum.
(Raad speaking on phone)
>> RAAD:
>> MAGHAFI AND RAAD:
(phone beeps)
>> MAGHAFI: He hung up.
♪ ♪
We also rang Sheikh Salawi,
but he didn't respond.
We approached Iraq's most senior
Shia cleric,
Grand Ayatollah al-Sistani.
He declined to be interviewed,
but replied in a statement.
"If these practices are
happening
in the way you are saying, then
we condemn them unreservedly.
Temporary marriage is not
allowed as a tool to sell sex
in a way that belittles
the dignity
and humanity of women."
He said the abuses we'd seen
were happening
"because the authorities were
not enforcing the law."
We approached the Iraqi
government on multiple occasions
to ask them why they weren't
cracking down
on abusive pleasure marriages,
but they declined to provide
anyone for interview.
A spokesman told "Frontline,"
"If women don't go to the police
with their complaints
against clerics, it's difficult
for the authorities to act."
♪ ♪
But for many young women
across Iraq,
there's no hope of justice.
Rusul is still working
for the cleric.
She feels she has no choice.
>> RUSUL (dramatized):
♪ ♪
>> For more on this and other
"Frontline" programs,
visit our website at
pbs.org/frontline.
♪ ♪
"Frontline's"
"Kids Caught in the Crackdown"
and "Iraq's Secret Sex Trade"
are available
on Amazon Prime Video.
♪ ♪